# ScalaLR

Here we have a straightforward LR parser generator for Scala, using
**GNU Bison (version 3.8.2)** as a workhorse to generate LR shift-reduce
parser tables. **ScalaLR** is built on the assumption the code it generates will
become part of a parser that will yield an abstract syntax tree. *Of course
there's no harm in the parser yielding (say) a numeric value, or even being
run for its side-effects and yielding `Unit` -- though thsi will not be common.*

### Grammar notation 
The notation for productions and priorities is somewhat similar to
Bison's notation; but there are important overall differences, as exemplified by
the following fragment. We will document these in detail in due course; but for the moment it should be
sufficient for a knowledgeable reader to inspect the files `generatesmall.scala`
with `runsmall.scala` and `generatexpr.scala` with `runexpr.scala`
````
%notation  Expr
%package   expr.Expr
%path      "testbed/src/main/scala/expr"

%include {
   // Scala source to be included in a generated file that supports or implements a lexer
   import org.sufrin.utility.SourceTextCursor
   import org.sufrin.scalalr.SourceLocation

    object Scanner {
      def apply(chars: SourceTextCursor): Scanner = new Scanner(chars)
    }

    class Scanner(chars: SourceTextCursor) extends Iterator[Token] { ... }

}

%token ID(String) `(` `)` `[` `]` `;` LEXICALERROR(String)  // §1
%left `+`                                                   // §2
%left `*`                                                   // §2

%rules

%include {
 // Scala source to be included in a generated file that supports or implements
 // the abstract syntax derived from productions

 import org.sufrin.scalalr.SourceLocation
 // Abstract syntax nodes §4
 trait Expr { val loc: SourceLocation }                     // §4
 case class Id(s: String, loc: SourceLocation) extends Expr
 case class Binop(op: String, l: Expr, r: Expr, loc: SourceLocation) extends Expr
 case class Bra(expr: Expr, loc: SourceLocation)extends Expr
}

exprs: (List[Expr]) = expr            { List($expr) }                   // §3, §4
                  |   exprs `;` expr  { $expr::$exprs }                 // §4
                  ;

expr: Expr = ID                  { Id($ID, $START) }                    // §4, 
           | l:expr `*` r:expr   { Binop("*", $l, $r, $START) }
           | l:expr `+` r:expr   { Binop("+", $l, $r, $START) }
           | "(" expr ")"        { Bra($expr, $START) }                 //§5
           | `[` expr `]`        { $expr }
           ;
````

  1. Tokens (terminal symbols) may be specified. Each that carries an irredundant value
  must have the type of that value specified. 

  2. Shift-reduce conflicts can be resolved by specifying the
  associativity and precedence of (terminal) symbols, as in Bison.

  3. Nonterminal symbols have types specified explicitly on the left hand side of 
  their definition.

  4. The abstract syntax node represented by each production is specified as a Scala block 
  expression at its end. Such expressions may refer to
  the values of symbols (terminal or nonterminal) that appear in the production,
  by `$label` (for a symbol labelled in the production by prefixing it with `label:`), 
  or by `$symbol` when that `symbol` appears unlabelled and uniquely. 
  They  may also refer to the start and end source location of the
  text matched by the production using `$START` and `$END`.
  
  5. Tokens enclosed in single quotes, double quotes
  or backticks are treated identically during code generation: they need not be declared
  in a `%token` section. 



### Generated files

The generator produces three Scala files from each parser specification; these appear in
the directory corresponding to the prefix of the `%package` specification, and
(usually) named:

  1. **Scanner.scala** 
  defines the Scala case classes and types corresponding to each `%token` definition.
  There is provision for including the source text of the lexical scanner in this file.

  2. **Tables.scala**  defines the shift-reduce tables corresponding to the grammar. These will be
  interpreted by an LRParser automaton at parse-time.

  3. **Reduction.scala** defines a function that maps each production number to a 
  function that combines the  values that are generated by its right-hand-side to form 
  the value of the production itself.


The generator also produces a plain Bison grammar `.y` file, a `.xml` file
and a `.output` file: all named for the specified `%notation`. These can (occasionally) be
helpful in diagnosing conflicts/ambiguities that Bison discovers while processing the 
grammar specification. 
The `.y` file transforms some grammar symbols to straightforward Bison names of the 
form **TOK**-*nn* in order to avoid confusing Bison: but under normal circumstances
one need not know anything about these (or inspect the `.y` file), because the `.output` 
file shows the grammar symbols as given in grammar notation.

### Testing
Some test grammars (for the bootstrap generator) appear in `bootstrap/src/test/scala` as embedded strings: for example 
`generatexpr.scala` and `generatesmall.scala` and `generatetinyfun.scala` -- they can be used 
generate scala code  by running them as from IntelliJ (or elsewhere). Those mentioned above generate code 
under `testbed/scala/src/main/scala` in the directories  `{expr,small,tinyfun}` that can be 
tested by running one of `{runsmall,runexpr,runtinyfun}` from IntelliJ 
or using `scala-cli` in `testbed/scala/src/main/scala` with one of the
commands:

scala-cli run runsmall.scala small --jar ../../../../scalalr.jar
scala-cli run runexpr.scala expr --jar ../../../../scalalr.jar
scala-cli run runtinyfun.scala TinyFun.scala tinyfun --jar ../../../../scalalr.jar


The ScalaLR jar file in the root is an artefact that I get
IntelliJ to build. Most of the jar is destined for use at scala 
code-generation time; but the LRParser automata live there too at the moment.

### Gotchas
Error recovery is not yet properly implemented. The `Pull` automaton 
reports the first syntax error and bails. The `Push` automaton does likewise if there
is no `error`-handling state available, and  "recovery" that otherwise results 
is not properly implemented or documented.

### Roadmap
We aim to accomplish the following tasks as soon as we can. They are listed
here in no particular order.

1. Error recovery properly implemented.

2. System to be self-hosting: ie using a scalalr-derived parser rather
   than the present hand-coded recursive descent parser. 

3. Higher-level constructs such as %list, %option to express complex 
   grammar expressions that would normally have to be "hand-coded" such as:
````     
      exprlist: List[Expr]  = exprlistr { $exprlistr.reverse }
      exprlistr: List[Expr] = 
                expr { List($expr) } | exprlist1 ',' expr  { $expr :: $exprlistr }
      exprlist: List[Expr] = 
                expr { List($expr) } | expr ',' exprlist  { $expr :: $exprlist }
      optexpr: Option[Expr] = 
            { None } | expr { Some($expr) }
````
These could be expressed more concisely in-situ, for example:
````          
      ID '(' exprlist: (%revlist expr ',') ')' { Apply($ID, $exprlist) }  
      ID '(' exprlist: (%list    expr ',') ')' { Apply($ID, $exprlist) }
      RETURN optexpr: (%option expr) ';'       { Return($optexpr) }
````

The published code will reflect current partial progress towards them when appropriate.

BS: April 14th, 2026


